welcome to topcast and to any regular
episode I suppose this is a little bit
casual it's not exactly a a live stream
as such but um I'm just recording this
off the cuff there may be some
construction noise in the background I'm
not going to bother trying to edit that
out or do anything about it
the purpose of this today as the title
would give some indication thereof is a
response to objectivist epistemology now
I do spend a lot of time obviously
trying to explain papyrian epistemology
and now and again I produce some
critiques of alternative epistemologies
things like Bayesian epistemology let's
say I've also produced some episodes
just simply titled something like
objective knowledge where I try to
provide the best explanation I can of
Papa's understanding of how knowledge is
created augmented with the improvements
that I think David Deutsch has made as
well what I'm doing today is taking that
stuff and applying it to something by an
objectivist there's a lot of objectivist
writings out there about epistemology
I like to take these guys seriously in
their own terms because they're serious
they're serious about trying to come to
an understanding of knowledge I think
objectivism has a lot of great virtues I
think it has a wonderful understanding
and defense of things like capitalism
and personal Liberty and the way in
which economic systems obviously work
things about personal responsibility
finding value in life value in your own
life all of that stuff is great but in
terms of the epistemology the
epistemology is to me and I'm going to
speak plainly here primitive it hasn't
moved far at all beyond the ancient
misconceptions it's mired in the same
problems that all the people prior to
Papa had they the the greater difficulty
I have with objectivism is not just that
well they're just going through all the
same misconceptions I could leave that
aside it's just that they also insist on
using the this word objective rather
often and Ein Rand of course called her
philosophy objectivism what objectivism
is is the philosophy of iron Rand I
follow euron Brook on this euron Brook
says well you can make progress in
philosophy you can make progress in
epistemology absolutely for sure but you
can't kind of make progress in
objectivism and he makes a good point as
to why because that's a closed system
it's a closed system because einrand
wrote it down so whatever Iran wrote
down that's it that's that's the that's
what objectivism is
it's a strange way to think about things
but you know if you want to call it that
you can call it that it's kind of like
regarding the Lord of the Rings as well
that's what Tolkien wrote it's not an
open system that the story of The Lord
of the Rings is what Tolkien wrote other
people can produce other staff other
people can produce other writings about
the world of Middle Earth about the
world of Tolkien but it's not the Lord
of the Rings okay so it's not an open
system it's a closed system and so you
have to regard objectivism as the same
kind of thing to some extent it I just
find it perverse because objectivism
implies objective an objective has a
good meaning in science and philosophy
and epistemology
and papa wrote the book called objective
knowledge and so we have this real
problem of terminology that is
unfortunately exacerbated by the
existence of this thing called
objectivism
especially when as I've argued before in
my piece on objective knowledge
we have an theory of objective knowledge
given to us by Papa and then you have
this thing called objectivism which I
think is subjectivist to the core it's
about subjects Minds people how people
feel and what's going on in people's
minds and we know this is not the case
we're actually in the process we I say
we but you know people on the papyrian
side of the lecture people who are
physicists people like Chiara maletto
David Deutsche who are working on the
concept of knowledge as resilient
information as something that yeah
although people do it it's not about
people okay in the same way that you
know it's a cosmic view of knowledge
it's saying that people are important
and significant in the world because
they create knowledge but knowledge
isn't in a sense
restricted by what any particular person
thinks about it that people's ideas are
about knowledge doesn't change what
knowledge is as a physical and abstract
thing out there in the world I think
Chiara uses the example you know if
people say well knowledge is just this
parochial thing about
people you know and so it's
anthropocentric to talk about knowledge
because knowledge is just something that
people do that's like saying you you're
saying that you've got a dishwasher
centered view of the universe if you
start saying things like dishwashers
have this special capacity to wash
dishes that exceeds the capacity of
anything else in the known universe to
do okay that's a true claim and it's a
claim kind of about the universe in a
sense there are these things that exist
in it called dishwashers that wash
dishes better than anything else we know
but it's not a dishwasher centered view
of the universe
and so in the same way people create
knowledge and knowledge actually has
this capacity to go on and do stuff in
the universe to radically change the
universe but it's not a person entered
view of knowledge okay because just
because you're saying that people exist
and they can create knowledge in this
way and they can have this profound
effect on the universe it doesn't it's
got nothing to do with a subjective view
of knowledge the objective view of
knowledge says that knowledge has
physical effects out there in the real
world and this demands explanation in
terms of physics
in terms of ideas about stuff in the
universe and laws that that stuff
behaves you know in the form of us you
know just the way the dishwasher obeys
certain laws in order to wash dishes and
if you want to understand the operation
of a dishwasher you kind of have to
understand the laws that are governing
the dishwasher okay classical mechanical
laws about engines and water and all
sorts of stuff like that we don't know
what the laws are that sort of bound the
way in which people can create knowledge
we're still coming to an understanding
of that and so this is why again
epistemology has this deep connection to
physics we're struggling to understand
this stuff it's important that we do but
we need to take knowledge out of the
realm of concerns about personal
psychology concerns about what people
believe uh and what people might think
they've induced let's say from the
observations that they make okay it's
not about people even though people are
the things that create the knowledge the
knowledge goes on to be tested against
objective reality and it can be
instantiated in things can be
represented in things that aren't people
and transmitted in a substrate
independent way in other words it can be
transmitted from the Mind onto paper
into computers transmitted over long
distances and then copied into these
other physical forms and eventually
affecting other people or affecting huge
structures you know we've got the
International Space Station that's only
going to continue to radically transform
the universe these are things I've said
many times before I'm repeating them
here now because uh the hope is that
some objectivists might listen to this
and might just understand that popper
has something to say
Ein Rand said some things about
knowledge she got some things right I'm
not saying that she was completely and
utterly wrong there's an escape from
authoritarianism in the epistemology of
iron Rand that's fine that's great okay
empiricism was an escape from
authoritarianism in other words you
don't just get the knowledge from the
priests you don't have to believe what
the person with the credential says you
can come to your own ideas you can
construct knowledge for yourself so she
gets that right she just doesn't know
how it works and she doesn't escape from
induction this idea that you observe a
particular number of things
and then from those limited finite set
of observations you somehow come up with
a generalized rule or a universal law a
scientific theory and and this is the
poverty of that view
now I should just say and this is
something that has appeared on my
website for well I suppose many many
years now probably a decade or something
I had this and it's on the about part of
my website I just need to say it now
because I know that there are people
engaged in these kind of discussions so
get very upset they don't like to hear
especially iron Rand being criticized in
a deep foundational way so I just want
to say this and what I say on my about
page the very last line of my about to
page on my website and it reads quote
criticism is the best thing you can do
for an idea arrogance isn't a criticism
end quote so I'm not going to say Ein
Rand is arrogant some people will say
I'm arrogant for saying iron is
completely Foundation well not
completely but foundationally
fundamentally wrong when it comes to
epistemology she hasn't added anything
new to epistemology she gets many many
things wrong
if only the objectivist took on popular
epistemology it would be so much the
Richer for that they would understand
how progress occurs they'd have a more
optimistic view especially of other
people as well on the error-prone nature
of other people and perhaps take away
many many of the discussions they have
about who's a good person who's a bad
person who's an ally to their cause and
who isn't because often it comes down to
this person is a bad person because
they're not able to create knowledge in
the right way of course Papa has this
different view of people as knowledge
creators who are always error-prone
infinite in their ignorance and fallible
so we have kind of a more compassionate
view of other people because of the
epistemology it leads to that idea that
everyone's error-prone including the
objectives especially on this point so I
am taking things seriously here I'm I'm
criticizing the ideas because as I say
there and as I've always had the
philosophy the criticism is the best you
can do for an idea if any didn't care
about it I wouldn't bother doing this
and then you know there's in certain
moods in which I I cannot be bothered
kind of engaging with uh some people who
are dogmatically wedded to the entirety
of Iran's philosophy look put it this
way I'm not entirely wedded to the
entirety of Papa's philosophy I think
that there are aspects of his views on
economics for example that I think are
wrong I don't concentrate on them I
ignore them I don't bother criticizing
them because I think that's just a
better idea so you just pick the best
ideas the ideas that solve your problem
the ideas that work and are the best
explanations okay iron Rand has things
that you can extract out of the body of
work that she has used them but I would
certainly never call myself an
objectivist and one reason is because
objectivist epistemology which they
claim is the foundational thing upon
which the rest is built
is necessary in order to produce what's
called objectivism I think that's wrong
I think you can get to the economics the
decapitalism and to aspects of the
morality By ignoring the epistemology in
fact you have to if you want to validly
do it because the epistemology is false
and you can't get truth out of a
falsehood
a complete falsehood anyway so for today
I'm not responding directly to
the content in Iran's work because I've
already done that and you know the
previous episode was was me responding
directly to iron Rand so that's been
done and so it's something something
different today one other really
important reason for doing something
like this is that having looked at iron
Rand in her own words in an introduction
to objectivist epistemology and I made
that previous podcast about an hour
devoted entirely to analyzing excerpts
from that work and the feedback I got
from objectivists was predictable in a
sense people saying I misinterpreted
Rand she didn't mean what I said that
she meant that in fact when she's
talking about concept formation she
means fallible knowledge creation Now I
didn't get that out of introduction to
objectivist epistemology and insofar
it's as it's there it's contradicted by
other things that she says but whatever
the case people claim I don't understand
Rand so the next step the next step is
to go to other people who self-identify
as objectivists who say they've also
read these books by Rand in these papers
by Rand on epistemology and are
reinterpreting them into their own words
so let's see what the objectivists get
from introduction to objectivist
epistemology and so we're going through
this filter system so I've looked at
Rand I've critiqued Rand I've been told
by some objectivists that my critique
isn't valid and so now now I'm going to
take the word of the objectivists we're
not Rand we're interpreting Rand for the
rest of us and now I'm going to critique
them so I think I'm I'm trying to do a
as Fair a spread in terms of an approach
to critiquing the ideas of objectivism
by looking at the person namely Ein Rand
in her own words and now also looking at
other people who endorse the work of
iron Rand who are putting that in their
own words so beyond doing these two
things I don't know what more I can do
but this is my Approach and and hence
this additional podcast or podcasts
today I'm not going to speak about
Leonard pikoff's stuff it was um
possibly Ein rand's greatest supporter
promoter I've talked about euron Brooks
stuff on the podcast before you can go
back through my back catalog and see
some occasions where I've directly tried
to connect and some of what I talk about
here to euron Brooke I think you're on
Brook is a brilliant Expositor of her
ideas instead what I'm doing is I'm
taking a paper written by a fellow
called
Thomas miovis Jr and he describes
himself as a Bachelor of Arts in both
physics and philosophy from the
University of Dallas and graduated in
1987. he's prolific on places like Cora
and other forums he runs a particular
website which is called applied
philosophyonline.com and he's written
copious articles all about iron Rand and
objectivism so he's very well read on
this stuff and so he can incorporate
ideas from diverse parts of Iran's
philosophy and synthesize them together
and explain them and this is the
important thing he can explain them well
to other people and so I've encountered
Thomas mioves and I've had an exchange
with him and he just wasn't buying it he
wasn't buying a Popper's epistemology so
I thought I'd I'd do him the credit of
because he provided me with a link to a
paper specifically about induction which
gives an insight into the way that the
objectivists think about this and how
they try to salvage this concept of
induction and so I'm just going to go
through that and we have to say that
Thomas doesn't represent directly what
Ein Rand says but it gives you a sense
of what the objectivists
think about induction and how they go
about trying to explain it and also
personally it will give me some ability
to prepare for conversations I might
have in the future with objectivists and
if adjectivists hear this and they want
to have a conversation with me about
this then they have some Grist for the
mill as well because we want to be able
to actually come to a meeting of mind I
think epistemology is important I think
that knowing how knowledge is created
helps us to create it better especially
when we're running into problems and
especially in the era of people
deferring increasingly to Authority and
thinking that the science speaks for
itself and that kind of thing we need to
have a a more rigorous understanding of
how it is we can be fallible how it is
that we can construct knowledge which is
open to a revision and yet be able to
say there is a categorical difference
between knowing stuff and having a good
explanation and not and making stuff up
and being in ignorance and all that kind
of thing and so this is is an important
problem that always has been and this
problem hasn't left us but it can be
improved when people of Reason which I
would regard the objectivists as being
just as I would regard the bayesians as
being and and rationalists in general as
being of having a meeting of mind and
coming together so that we can counter
what would be
anti-enlightenment and anti-intellectual
sentiment that's out there because we're
all on the same side when it comes to
that
so having a unified front when it comes
to fallibalism and the construction of
knowledge I think could be helpful or
not we'll see this is my attempt okay
now it's going to I admit come across as
rather strident but this is simply
because we need to be clear we just this
is very much what iron Rand would say
you just need to speak what you think is
correct you just have to say it clearly
and so I'm going to say clearly here
that Thomas is completely wrong
okay not completely I'm gonna go stop
saying that Thomas is wrong in
fundamental ways and he's wrong in
fundamental ways because he's getting a
lot of his stuff from Iran from
objectivism and that is fundamentally
wrong when it comes to objectivism so
I've said that enough let me get into
the explanation as to why this is the
case so I'm reading from a paper written
in 2014 by Thomas I'm just going to
refer to him as Thomas throughout this
and he says this is a an actual a major
essay he's written on induction
Incorporated many of his previous ideas
and he thinks this is a much better
written essay and so it's just titled
induction okay so I'm going to do this
as I do with my books I'm going to quote
a bit and then I'm going to respond I
can't go through the entire
essay here because well again to be
clear I think it's repetitive I think
he's saying similar things throughout
the essay that he makes early on in the
essay and at the end of the year say so
sometimes he's not adding anything it
just becomes very repetitious and so my
criticisms would continue to be
repetitious this is probably going to go
on for quite a while I can't imagine how
long I may have to cut it short let's
just see Thomas begins quote
after giving it considerable thought I
think it is possible to incorporate
concept formation generalizations
scientific induction and philosophical
induction under one general term of
induction end quote so what he's saying
there is making a claim that all of
these things are precisely the same kind
of thing in other words concept
formation generalization scientific
induction philosophical induction
so immediately we've got an issue
in particular this idea of concept
formation he is saying well that just is
induction
for me that immediately is an issue
because for almost all of human history
in particular in philosophy when I say
human history recorded human history
recorded human history of the history of
ideas
people have tried to communicate using a
Common Language and in this case
we have an understanding of what
induction is this is why I've argued
before that neologisms people making up
words
hinders communication
and here Thomas is just conflating
concept formation which is a mystery to
most people
with the process of induction which I
would say is well understood and well
understood to be false
so the argument will become
as far as I can tell here is this thing
that is well understood well understood
by the way not to work to be irrational
this thing that I'm calling irrational
of course being induction
which has at its heart a problem that
has plagued people from before Hume
through to David Hume and later until
Papa who wrote the book essentially on
the solution to the problem of induction
because spoiler for objectivist perhaps
listening induction is indeed irrational
it cannot possibly work it's not a
method of reaching conclusions
from any finite set of observations one
cannot simply validly draw a logical
conclusion that any universal claim
follows
that is well understood concept
formation on the other hand is something
quite different a forming a concept of
something you're not going from the
observations and then go through some
logical or pseudological process to get
to this explanation you've got
observations and observations are not
explanations so the the problem is how
do you get from the observations to the
explanations
just calling that induction is is not a
solution it's just giving a label to a
problem
they can call it concept formation but
you've still got the same problem
and you've got a double problem because
people already have a word for
generalizing from observation
observation observations to a a
generalization that observations of that
sort will continue that's called
induction which is the error concept
formation is a mystery it's synonymous
in popular epistemology with the concept
of conjecture that's from the book
conjectures and refutations it's the
title of Papa's great work on this it's
why he's famous why he's ignored and not
read by objectivists I don't know but
he's he's trying to tell you that yeah
there is this problem right you we do
observe okay observation's got something
to do with the creation of knowledge but
it can't be
generalizing those observations into a
prediction of some sort
much less a theory of some sort
and simply calling it concept formation
isn't a solution the question is how is
this done how is this concept formation
actually done
and saying that that is induction is
wrong
it's wrong for two reasons one it's not
an explanation just labeling something
some explanation and two the idea of
induction already has a well understood
meaning a definition if you like
of reasoning from the particular to the
general but what this tells me
immediately that Thomas is conflating
these things is saying the concept
formation is induction well he's noticed
a problem he's noticed there's a
difference between some things what is
called induction
which is a crucial part of the
epistemology of Rand and defined by Rand
and defended by her and he's noticed
there's a difference between that and
what he's calling scientific induction
and and other kinds of induction
philosophical induction he invokes as
well so he's noticing there's a
difference between these things after
all he's saying there's at least four of
them because there's a scientific
they're philosophical the induction and
the concept formation
but because he wants to defend
objectivism I mean objectivism
objectivist epistemology has at its
heart
in induction he wants to preserve the
term so he's got to redefine it why
because he knows he's noticed the
problem but this is trying to hold
rand's epistemology of objectivism
trying to hold it immune from criticism
from refutation by redefining it by
saying Ah that's not what is meant over
there an objective is not what what is
really meant this is what induction
means but that holds it immune from
criticism
you you need to stick your neck out and
I think Rand did stick a neck out and
she stuck a neck out on this and she was
she's been refuted she'd been shown
false that's yeah okay it's it's a floor
in the epistemology it doesn't make
everything that she said wrong so what
what Thomas is doing is he's taking a
genuine true process of concept
formation
which all of us know exists we just
don't know how it works rather like we
know how human Minds we know that they
exist but we don't know how they work we
notice we know how galaxies rotate we
know that Galaxy's Rotator I should say
they rotate in a specific way but we do
not know why they rotate in that
specific way so we invent this term
called dark matter which is just a a
name of a problem for why it is that
galaxies rotate an unusual way we
postulate there must be missing matter
out there providing the gravity that
speeds them up
but it's still a problem right concept
formation whatever that is is a problem
not explained by induction
so but he's taking that that well-known
and appreciated idea of concept
formation or better yet knowledge
creation and he just says well that is
induction so that fails for those
reasons
not least because it doesn't solve the
question of how knowledge is created
in details beyond the fact that it's
conjectured but we already knew that
much it also fails to account for the
differences between this scientific and
philosophical induction and concept
formation and it doesn't explain how the
process is in science and philosophy how
they differ or why what the line of
demarcation is
so in all these ways you solved no
problems and he's beginning to introduce
many many more and we're at sentence one
and we should probably say or just
re-emphasize
that these criticisms are of this
particular paper and the contents of
this particular paper so they might not
be readily transferable to objectivism
of Ram's philosophy but by implication
if a scholar or a person at least who
has deep interests in the work of iron
Rand who has read by his own admissions
widely and deeply the work of iron Rand
was a follower of her thoughts who
understands her epistemology and is here
explaining a version thereof of it
because presumably he's trying to
improve the exposition of it or in fact
improve the philosophy itself then the
criticisms that I'm giving are of this
paper and perhaps not of Rand herself
but by implication there would be a
criticism of Rand Itself by logical
implication because if what Thomas is
doing here is trying to improve upon or
adapt einram because he's found some
deficiency there in either the
expression or substance thereof then
everything that he's criticizing I agree
with those criticisms just I'm going
further and criticizing also what he
says
I have criticisms of Rand I've read
Ayn rand's in particular I focused on
her epistemology
and found all of these things that I'm
about to say here also apply there to
her work as well but I yeah I'm waiting
for the day to discuss uh in real life
in person on a podcast or something like
that
this material okay so let's keep going
with Thomas's piece Thomas continues to
write quote
I think there are enough similarities
between the mental processes including
observation to abstraction omitting
measurements the unit perspective and
that each leads to a product that is
open-ended within a range to say the
similarities are sufficient to Warrant
having one General concept of induction
in fact what got me thinking along these
lines is the following passage from
Iran's introduction to objectivist
epistemology pausing their my reflection
end quote
okay so he's about to get to quoting
objectivist epistemology introduction to
objective epistemology and objectivist
epistemology is you know it's a 293 page
book it's a big Tome all about uh about
the epistemology of iron
um and it's just it's such a it's such a
mountain to climb I mean on every page
there's a misconception and a fans of
topcast will know that I've done this
sort of thing over and again where I've
um tried to critique various other
thinkers intellectuals and so on and
it's so hard to know where to begin but
you begin somewhere and then you know
you have these lengthy expositions and
it can be an arduous arduous process I
just process for me well I kind of find
it fun but there comes a point where
it's just frustrating the mountain of
misconceptions that exist there and Rand
is one such when it comes to
epistemology there are commonalities
sure but it's the differences that make
all the difference here
and so I haven't I've written a few
things about the work I've mentioned at
times the work in my podcast called
objective knowledge I do refer to
objectivist epistemology and I'll pull
out some quotes and we talk about it
it's one of those books where I've read
through it and just you know there's
just so much to disagree with it's hard
to begin constructing something like a
podcast in order to respond to it so I'd
rather have a conversation about it and
so this this particular article before
us right now by Thomas is uh easier
there's an inroad into the the broad
thinking of objectivists on this
uh what I'd just say about what he's
written there because he begins his
little passage so it's I think there are
enough similarities between the mental
processes including observation to
abstraction emitting measurements and
the unit perspective and that each leads
to a product that is open-ended within a
range to say the similarities are
sufficient to Warrant having one General
concept of induction okay so he wants to
have this one thing called induction he
wants to have one label that covers all
of these things observation to
abstraction now how that works well this
is the this is the whole problem you
know you're observing stuff and then you
get to this General law an abstraction
emitting measurements the unit
perspective you know these things are
philosophical jargon that make it
difficult to follow for the lay person
to read and there's another difficulty I
have with certain ways of philosophizing
philosophy advising in the abstract
using jarg and I don't like that it's
the same reason I don't like postmodern
style thinking and writing like
so-called objectivism or objectivist
epistemology is
at heart subjectivist you can see it
right there because he's talking about
mental processes mental processes so it
takes epistemology out of the physical
world of objects and comparing stuff to
reality and puts it into mental
processes
and I've argued before this is why it's
a perverse invocation of the term
objective
Popper's objective knowledge has it that
it is about objects and stuff out there
and you know how you go about
constructing stuff in the world
substrate independent that we call
knowledge that solves your problem and
that that's also an objective claim but
if it's about mental processes then then
then epistemology is a study of Minds
The goings-on in minds but it's not
the guesses are generated by people that
then tested against reality and can is
absolutely crucial entirely missed by
the philosophy of Rand entirely absent
that the knowledge is instantiated in
physical substrains it is represented in
objects it's out there and it can be
tested by the functionality of those
objects and the Fidelity with which
those objects can be used to copy and
transmit the knowledge this is utterly
independent of the goings-on in mind
it's not about mental processes missing
the point okay so now we get the quote
from Rand and the quote from Rand is
quote thus the process of forming and
applying Concepts contains the essential
pattern of two fundamental methods of
cognition induction and deduction the
process of observing the facts of
reality and of integrating them into
Concepts is in essence a process of
induction
so let's just repeat that let's just
keep that in mind this is what Rand is
saying the process of observing the
facts of reality and of integrating them
into Concepts is in essence a process of
induction so that's what she thinks she
thinks it's a process of of observing
the facts of reality of observing the
facts of reality observing I know I'm
laboring this point but I'm presuming at
least some objectivists will be
listening to this what a pop hearing
would say what I would say is that that
claim is just a fundamental
misunderstanding of how concept
formation as you're calling it occurs
there's no process of observing the
facts of reality let's consider an
example consider observing Stars what
you see at night a cold dim tiny
pinpricks of light for eons our
ancestors use their senses to observe
those facts of reality but those
observations got them not one jot closer
to reality reality so far as we know it
always harshly always imperfectly
consists of stars but they're not cold
they're hot they're not dim they're
bright they're not tiny they're vast you
don't get that by observation
observation of the kind you're talking
about gives you an entirely misleading
picture of reality popper explains what
we do has nothing to do with that kind
of observation instead first we
conjecture explanations we begin with
our guesses about reality we're walking
around with knowledge already then we
use those observations to check those
explanations against reality
observations are crucial I'm not saying
observations aren't important for the
generation of knowledge I'm just saying
you can't derive the knowledge from your
observations so the process is nothing
like Rand imagines moreover we never get
the facts of reality what does that mean
the facts of reality the facts of
reality that's the domain of ontology
what is true in terms of actual reality
but we only have access to ontology to
to to Ultimate Reality to the facts of
reality via an epistemological process
the construction of knowledge and the
construction of knowledge merely
represents our best understanding of
reality understanding the truth of
reality we're representing that we're
not getting to it it's it's confusing
our understanding of the thing with the
thing in itself and our understanding is
always error prone open to
interpretation and Improvement in fact
that's how progress occurs we begin with
errors with problems and only by
correcting those errors finding
Solutions do we make progress the actual
process of concept formation knowledge
creation is about observing yes but not
observing the facts of reality it's
about observing scant bits of evidence
little bits of light we guess coming
from the sky we guess now we try to
understand we could be deceived or
simply an error after all the Ancients
thought that the little bits of light
were coming from not this thing the sky
they're coming from the celestial sphere
there are holes in the celestial sphere
coming from a uniform light source
further off but we try to understand but
we could always be deceived or an error
it's it's a long chain of further
guesses and careful checks by putting
things actually between us and the Stars
glass tubes and computers the telescopes
and instruments of astronomy they bring
us somewhat closer to reality but never
at it never to it never had a final
explanation never to the facts of
reality we just refine and improve our
knowledge and eventually after lots of
work in this case Millennia centuries
decades in terms of astronomy we
gradually gradually accumulate better
ideas by correcting our errors but if it
was just a process of observing the
facts of reality we just look up and see
burning hot furnaces of nuclear fusion
in the chorus spherical objects
occurring at hundreds of millions of
degrees happening many light years away
but we don't observe that we do we
observe none of those reactions in fact
what we understand tells us that it's
impossible to observe those reactions we
can't observe those facts of reality
that those reactions in the core of the
star are in principle unobservable no
instrument can get there anything made
of matter is going to be vaporized turn
to its constituent particles it'll be
unable to send information back to us if
you don't like that example consider
dinosaurs no one's ever going to observe
a dinosaur the facts of reality about
dinosaurs what they're going to observe
David Deutsch uses this wonderful
example instance of this You observe
rocks some rocks have strange patterns
in them these patterns are things called
fossils to some people most of us now
they they look like animals of assault
but nothing that walks the Earth but
what are they it took decades centuries
in fact to figure out what the heck
these things are now how old these rocks
were how old these fossils were we
interpret stuff we eventually build up
this story called an explanation a
scientific explanation of fossils and
that's scientific explanation invokes
these things called Dinosaurs something
we we don't observe we don't observe
dinosaurs we observe rocks again yeah
there are movies like Jurassic Park
where they they show you these dinosaurs
running around but no one's ever seen
that in real life
it's fiction what was it really like
back then well we've got some ideas from
scant evidence bits of rock taken from
deep under the Earth We're Not observing
those facts of reality we're guessing
this explanation and once we've guessed
that we go out and we compare our guests
to further observations we make but
every time we dig up a new fossil we
often get new problems this one doesn't
make sense why is this one in this
strata not that strata it seems too old
or Too Young what's going on here we
thought these things were like lizards
and they should have been cold-blooded
but now they've got feathers they're
more like birds what is going on there's
so many problems with Dinosaurs the
theory of dinosaurs not that they didn't
exist but we don't understand it because
we can't just observe the facts of
reality if we could then everyone would
understand dinosaurs unproblematically
we don't we don't observe the facts of
reality Rand is simply categorically
wrong about this we interpret little
bits of evidence and gradually build up
knowledge about reality the so-called
facts of reality come at the end of this
story they are logical derivations of
the explanations where do the
explanations come from the explanations
come from problems we encounter that
require us to conjecture them and then
test them using observations if we don't
have a problem then we don't have we
already have knowledge and then the
question is well how did we get that
knowledge that we're already walking
around with unproblematically so to
speak well you've got to go back to a
time when you did have a problem okay
and why did you have that problem
because well you had that problem
because some of the knowledge you're
walking around with at that time didn't
seem to fit with what you just observed
you encountered a problem what do you
mean that knowledge didn't fit with the
observation you make where did you get
that knowledge and so it keeps on going
back and back and back we always start
with this knowledge right you're walking
around with this knowledge then it's a
problem then knowledge and problem the
knowledge and problem you're not going
from the observation and putting the
knowledge into your head that's like the
bucket theory of knowledge you're just
filling your head with observations that
are giving you reality it's a very
mystical idea like divine inspiration or
something it's false now ran who's
obviously an an avowed atheist rejected
supernaturalism but this is a
supernatural epistemology it's saying
that via some magical process the
knowledge is there in reality and you
just have to have it transmitted to your
brain but how how is this concept
formation done well it's done inside of
your mind by conjecture so this idea
that we have this process of observing
the facts of reality and integrating
them into Concepts and that is the
process of induction conflates actually
the era of empiricism that we observe
reality or the facts of reality and that
other process of the same name induction
and traditionally always used to label a
process of moving from singular
instances to universal laws everyone
knew that couldn't work it was a problem
it was shown it couldn't work it was
strictly illogical and pop foreign
look you've got to accept the fact it
doesn't work it simply doesn't exist as
a process it's not valid so it's not a
thing so therefore knowledge can't use
it give up on it do away with it we can
discard it deduction's a thing but not
induction you don't have to try and ape
what's going on in mathematics
mathematics produces mathematical
knowledge you begin with the axioms you
follow the rules of inference you get to
your conclusions or theorems very well
that's mathematics all right now we're
talking science and other stuff if you
want to say well it's got to work the
same way you've got to start with
something like observations they're
axioms and then you go through some
process of concept formation we'll call
it and then you get your knowledge
you're trying to shoehorn a mathematical
process into science into some other
kind of area where where you don't have
axioms to begin with the whole problem
with that by the way is that you don't
know the axioms are true in mathematics
anyway proof is not strictly speaking a
method of generating math acknowledge
it's a it's a it's a computation you do
to show that theorems follow from
particular premises I guess you could
call that knowledge but it's a very
narrow kind of a thing so Papa just said
look knowledge doesn't begin an
observation it begins in problems from
there you made guesses about reality and
you check those against reality and all
of that process checking occurs out
there in the objective real world it's
not a parochial subject activity of
Minds okay so Thomas goes on Thomas
writes Aristotle defined induction to be
the process of reasoning from the
observation of concretes or individuals
to a general or Universal conclusion I
think this is a good working definition
and I think this type of ability to
abstract from particulars to the more
General conclusion stems from the human
mind's ability to Omit measurements end
quote okay so that's Thomas here he's
explicitly endorsing that definition of
going from individuals individual
instances to a general or Universal
conclusion you know other words the idea
that repeatedly observing sunrises
enables us to conclude sunrises will
continue into the future in other words
the future resembles the past it's a
predictive picture of Science and
knowledge but prediction is not the sole
purpose of knowledge explanation is
we want to know why the universal law is
the way it is saying well it worked
yesterday and the day before that and
the day before that that's no
explanation and indeed the sun will
continue to rise is not even an
explanation or a law at all it's just a
prediction that it is quite false in
many places
the poles the International Space
Station deep space whatever explanations
just do not have that form explanations
are about look the Earth rotates on its
axis the sun does not rise it mainly
appears to in some places because of the
motion of the earth and you get none of
that from observation this is why the
Ancients thought that it was the sun and
the rest of reality that moved around
the earth they observed the Earth to be
motionless observations do not give us
the facts of reality they do not give us
knowledge we guess at knowledge we guess
at it and create it via a mechanism only
poorly understood and then we check it
against reality Thomas goes on quote
while this has been explicitly
identified as an aspect of concept
formation by Iron Rand I think it is
implicit in the types of inductions that
Dr pikov and David Harriman discuss and
the purpose of this essay is to draw out
those similarities to make the case that
there are four types of inductions and
that these have enough similarities that
they can be integrated together into one
Global conception of induction end quote
so here Thomas and others perhaps depart
from Rand those who do so like Thomas do
so rightly for good reasons why they are
doing this is clear they notice that
rand's concept of induction does not
work and cannot work when accounting for
concept formation which is knowledge
production so they they try to put
things under the same umbrella some of
which are mysterious some of which
popper just means by conjecture so
they're noticing our problem but the
problem is that because they're not
familiar with popper much less David
Deutsch they don't get the solutions and
they don't get to the clarity of the
exposition about what good explanations
are and testability and actual objective
knowledge as resilient information and
its connection to physics and how
progress is possible and why this
happens and how to fully Escape
empiricism entirely and how trying to
drive Knowledge from the senses is
ridiculous doesn't work and how there's
a role for error identification and
correction and all of that all that
richness of popular and epistemology in
short What's Happening Here With Thomas
and with others is they notice the
problem with Iran's epistemology and
they suggest but that's okay what
induction really means what she really
might have meant is not just reasoning
from the particular to the general as it
always has been but it also means the
opposite of that coming up with a
universal law and then showing how the
particulars are large logically implied
instances of the universal law but at no
point did they grapple with but where
did the universal law come from in the
first place they just say induction all
over again he goes on quote one doesn't
always think of forming a concept as the
same thing as drawing a reason
conclusion from the facts but I think it
is clear that sometimes a great deal of
thought and effort must be put into
concluding if there are enough
similarities between known things to
incorporate them into one concept end
quote and what he said there likewise
identifies the problem he's at step one
indeed it cannot be the case that
concept formation is drawing a reasoned
conclusion from the facts it must be
something else it must involve instead a
great deal of thought and effort as he
says there yes indeed not just
observations lead to knowledge of
reality no the role of observations is
to provide a source of problems with
existing knowledge if you already know
something have an explanation have
knowledge then you'll observe things and
say well that makes sense that makes
sense everything makes sense today it's
either that or something does not make
sense in which case you don't know
what's going on you're like an
explanation you lack knowledge no
further amount of observing at that
point can possibly give you what you
need the knowledge you need to think
just as Thomas says you need to in
Papa's terminology conjecture well we
might say more casually take a stab at
it take a guess your guess May Fail
you'll know it fails but only then by
comparing the guess to reality does it
work or is it refuted by observation the
observation won't give you the answer it
won't give you the knowledge it will
just tell you that your knowledge
doesn't work it can falsify your claim
your knowledge comes from within it will
count as a good explanation to you when
it solves your problem it will in other
words make the observation unproblematic
and you'll carry on observing the world
is consistent with What You observe what
your senses tell you is going on until
you find another problem Thomas goes on
quote as a pointer to that type of
reasoning stemming from observations in
an inductive process leading to a
conclusion and then to a concept see how
Miss Rand handle handled the concept of
justice and how much effort she put into
making the case very clear some things
are similar While others are not in her
discussion of this term I'm going to
skip a bit here just because what I find
problematic here with iron Rand in
general an objectivists more broadly and
I think this is actually why this could
be an explanation as to why
a few scientists are objectivists
because few objectivists are scientists
or at least physicists anyway some are I
mean Thomas is saying that he did some
physics and it's because it's not
problem centered here and Thomas will
provide an attempt to provide I should
say some examples of drawn from science
but in general there's just a Poverty of
a substantive substantial contact with
science at all here objective
epistemology in general has a very poor
record with moving beyond just abstract
philosophizing and taking it into the
real world of examples and instances and
specifically the history of ideas and
most importantly the history of the
ideas in science this is an absolute
Chasm at the heart of the entire body of
work and approach of iron Rand iron was
great on economics she talked about the
history of economic systems and things
going on during her time and that's just
so important it grounds her discussions
of economics and trade and capitalism in
the real world it's talking about
reality her morality likewise to some
extent but the preeminent crystalline
easy to speak about way in which
knowledge is created is science if a
person discussing epistemology ignores
science substantial amounts of science
they ignore how very real world actual
knowledge is produced
they've got no examples to draw on and
they're not talking about actual
objective knowledge the knowledge of
objects knowledge of things Beyond stuff
like just psychology or more
controversial things perhaps like the
knowledge morality and history not to
say that epistemology doesn't apply to
those domains that it's somehow
different in those domains it it
absolutely does apply to those domains
but the problem is that people there in
history and morality disagree with the
facts of the matter there's different
interpretations and so this just adds an
extra people get distracted and start
talking about the history and talking
about the morality rather than focusing
on the epistemology
but in science it makes things much
easier and cleaner because there we can
talk about Ptolemy and and Galileo we
can we can at least agree Ptolemy was a
geocentrist and we can understand what
geocentrism is and Galileo was a
heliocentrist and we can discuss what
that means and Newton was a an early
physicist and and Einstein was a
physicist and we can talk about their
different kinds of physics and the
problems that they are involved in the
the very specific stuff that was going
on with them what they learned how they
learned it and how that all worked but
Rand Iran misses this her Defenders
avoid this they fall into complete
abstraction
philosophizing for philosophy's sake
rather than trying to solve a problem in
the knowledge production in science
where is an instance in actual science
that their ideas work well there's no
comment in her body of work we will see
in this piece here by Thomas there's
just nothing about how any of this works
in actual science it's disconnected from
from reality and this is a terrible
weakness and it's ultimately why the
epistemology files let's keep going
Thomas Wright's quote historically
induction has been taken to mean going
from the observation of particulars to
abstract thinking which I think is
possible within objectivism only if the
measurements are admitted so part of my
Approach will show that measurement
Omission is involved in all four types
of induction concept formation
generalization scientific induction and
philosophical induction end quote what
we're going to see is this measurement
of mission is his attempt to bring
science into things but it's very poor
it's very poor it doesn't make the point
he wants to but he agrees that it is
about going from particulars to abstract
thinking but again we don't have this
any process whereby this could possibly
occur it's also near legism generating
and conflating these four different
things of Science and philosophy and
generalization and concept formation
uh but it's better if we had very clean
specific examples of each which we don't
get he goes on to say quote for concept
formation one observes the facts of
reality end quote again how exactly if I
look outside as a child or if a child
looks outside and they see some light in
the sky they see they see blue and they
see green but if the child is young
enough they don't even know what those
words mean they just know that there's
differences they don't know what the sky
is you know if it's me as a very young
child am I am I observing the sky
I see trees but I don't know what they
are are all green things trees what
about that green stuff that grass but I
don't know the word for grass is the sky
real or is it an illusion turns out it's
actually just air or air is not actually
blue but it looks blue well this is a
complex process of actually seeing
sunlight but I'm not looking directly at
the Sun sunlight's not blue but why is
the sky blue then the sky doesn't exist
or why is the air blue the air is not
blue but I'm seeing blue well because of
the sunlight but the sunlight's white
well why is the sky blue and well
because sunlight or white light is
actually all the colors of the rainbow
so why aren't I seeing all the colors of
the rainbow there in the sky well
because the sky doesn't exist and it
can't be blue and it's not the air
that's glowing it's the light from the
sun and in fact it's being scattered oh
what's scattering oh that's a whole
other thing and you're not observing the
scattering of light specifically because
that's going on at the level of the mole
course but we call what's going on the
scattering of light I'm observing blue
up there and what even is this light
photons am I observing photons I can't
see any photons I again I just see blue
light but if I'm not observing photons
and what's going on well the photons are
these little particles of light they're
they're hitting my retina but I'm not my
retina I'm my brain well actually no I'm
my mind for my brain is just a bunch of
electrical crackles my mind however that
works that's a mystery and here is where
our scientific understanding truly ends
my mind interprets those electrical
crackles from my brain that's how
knowledge is created we call that
interpretation conjecture and refutation
because it is an abstract process of a
Kind poorly understood but this idea
that we observe the facts of reality in
the way induction would have it no
matter what kind of adduction it is is
so profoundly flawed and yet
simultaneously so widespread it is
actually one of the reasons progress
slows because some people with influence
tend to have great sway in persuading
people that we should just observe the
facts of reality but it's not that
simple we observe scant signals we get
via our imperfect sensors of that
reality again what's going on let's go
in reverse there are these crackles of
electrical activity going on inside of
our brain and that is interpreted by our
minds those crackles of electricity
inside of our brain well some of them
are occurring because photons of Light
have hit the retina of our eye then
transmitted via the optic nerve back to
the brain and the reason why those
photons hit the retina around our eyes
because we've looked up into the air and
we've looked up into the air we've seen
this blue and the reason we've seen blue
is because light from the sun which is
white all the colors of the rainbow is
getting scattered by molecules like
nitrogen in the atmosphere the blue gets
scattered more than anything else and
Scattered means it get it sort of
bounces off not exactly even that
process of bouncing off the the nitrogen
molecules is more complex causing
movement of electrons in those molecules
and whatever the case that the the light
goes off in all directions some of it is
directed back down towards the Earth
entering our eyes and causing those
electrical crackles this is what popper
means by Theory laid an observation
this is why it is such a deep rich
epistemology there's nothing like this
at all in the objectivist epistemology
of Iran's a disconnected from science
disconnected from this concept of
theory-lade and observation of how we're
so fallible because at any any of that
chain of explanation could be wrong
because the observation itself is
something we're understanding only and
perfectly you don't observe the facts of
reality again nature doesn't give us
perfect senses
what do you think an optical illusion is
what do you think change blindness is
look that up if you don't know it won't
make mistakes all the time I'm going to
come back to this Thomas goes on there
he says one observes the facts of
realities notice similarities of various
things observed within a context or an
abstraction from the background which
requires a type of selective mental
focus end quote so he thinks we notice
similarities between things but how do
we notice those similarities what counts
as a similarity
what is a very specific example are all
stars similar when we look up we already
said they're all cold and dim in the sky
so we're all stars like that how do we
distinguish the planets from the stars
in the sky are they different colors but
some stars are Reddish just like some
planets we do not see planets and stars
we see lights in the sky and we have
much work to do to interpret what we
think we see Thomas goes on to say the
abstraction from the background quote
unites the various observations together
by omitting measurements while retaining
the differentiated Concepts names the
concept I cat and then defines this
concept either by being able to point to
instances of those things which are
subsumed under the concept or in terms
of Concepts already created so as to
start building a conceptual hierarchy
the concept of cat can be understood by
pointing to various cats
observed or by referencing other
Concepts like a cat is a four-legged
animal with claws and fur and meows as a
means of communication end quote so you
can see here it's it's the old style
attempt of trying to turn all knowledge
generation concept formation into a
deductive process if you don't already
have the concept then you just rely on
other Concepts where do they come from
well concept formation of this kind
where if you don't already have the
concept you look at the concepts you've
got before and if you don't already have
Concepts before we've got to create them
how by relying on other Concepts and
observing stuff that you generalize this
is the picture this is how you develop
knowledge of what a cat is but it's not
true okay we begin with a problem this
is what actually happens when when
people are learning about cats a child
asks well what is that and we go oh
that's a cat so the child gets us okay
little furry things with four legs of
cats something that looks like that
so later on they see a dog and they go
ah cat and you correct them and you go
no dog woof noisy or you might say even
more than that more details later on you
just happen to hear meow hear that meow
cat the child then begins to refine
their guesses they're encountering
problems constantly what is that what
does that mean you give answers if I
don't get it immediately but they keep
on checking their guesses against
reality we don't know how people
construct the knowledge but this is how
they're doing it asking questions
encountering problems asking more
questions checking it against reality
the guesses they've got the guesses
they're making they're coming from
within not from without they're
subjective and origin but they are then
checked against reality which meant
makes them objective knowledge when
they're not refuted the child is
learning creating knowledge and that
comes from within their mind it does not
come from the reality out there that
idea that it's observations from which
we derive our knowledge is cut before
the horse
okay look we've said enough today I
think this has gone on for over an hour
so let's call it a day here there's more
that Thomas has written and there's more
that I have to say about what Thomas has
written as a as an objectivist scholar
as someone who understands the work of
iron random is putting it in their own
words and who is perhaps improving on it
but at least giving you a taste of what
people take from Iran where they think
iron might be deficient aware they're
following in her footsteps trying to
improve in the same direction and what I
would say is making all the same kinds
of missteps not improving anything along
the way not actually coming to a deep
understanding of where knowledge comes
from what knowledge even is as useful
information that solves a problem as
information that tends to get itself
copied as the infamous nation that once
instantiated in a physical substrate
somewhere or other tends to cause itself
to remain so all of that staff knowledge
as being objective in two senses not
because it's been derived from reality
but rather because it's being checked
against reality and any knowledge claim
knowledge itself can be wrong
objectively wrong ruling out dogmatism
by the way which insists that you can't
possibly be wrong and ruling out
relativism saying that no one is
objectively wrong because everyone's
claim that the truth is equal so only
Popper's version of objective knowledge
in this sense actually walks that line
actually says well you can objectively
be wrong and in fact you should expect
to be objectively wrong and not only is
it objective in that epistemological
sense but there's an ontological sense
as well namely it's knowledge that can
be instantiated in objects inexplicitly
they tell telescope instantiate the
instantiates the knowledge of Optics the
physics of Optics how light is bent
refracted and focused collected
refracted focused I should say
all objects are kind of like this they
can be reverse engineered because they
contain knowledge that we've actually
put into the object required for the
functionality of the object similarly
biological knowledge in the the the the
the cells of the nuclei of cells in the
form of DNA how to build life forms this
is all accounted for in the work of Carl
Poppa and David Deutsch it really does
solve problems it doesn't it doesn't
provide everything we would like to know
about knowledge Constructor theory is
already opening up possibilities for how
to come to an even deeper understanding
of the physics the physics mind you of
knowledge construction and all of this
is real world progress in philosophy
epistemology science about knowledge
which you just don't get from any other
philosopher the philosophy certainly not
certainly not objectivism or the work of
iron Rand or objectivists in general
that are just making the same old errors
of Plato and can't they're caught up in
these same old boring dead end
cul-de-sacs of
abstractly arguing about the meanings of
words
and same way that Wittgenstein did and
so many others now should be following
in the steps of Carl Poppa who himself
said you know he was following in the in
the steps of Socrates not Aristotle and
not Plato okay Socrates understood that
you know he could be wrong and that he
had questions and the questions were the
way in which we made progress on having
final answers okay
another rant by me more next time from
uh Thomas
miovis the objectivist I'll finish
reading his paper or certainly read a
little more provide some more commentary
on this uh and then one day you know
hopefully I'll be able to have a
discussion with some objectivists and
try to flesh this out
because I think I'm trying to do is fear
a job I can by providing the quotes and
providing commentary on the quotes from
Iran herself
and what one might say are Disciples of
or you know followers of enthusiasts of
einrant until next time bye-bye
[Music]
foreign